HDF5 is a very
useful file format
for storing scientific data.
So you're familiar
with your standard file
system that holds directories.
And in those directories,
there are files and so on.
And in fact, an HDF5 file
resembles that quite a lot.
Only the file system as a whole
is represented by the HDF5
file itself.
In a HDF5 file, you
can have groups.
And that's, of course, very
similar to directories.
So just as directories can
contain other directories,
groups can contain
other groups, and files
are represented as data sets.
So a data set in HDF5 is similar
to a file in the file system.
And that's, of course,
where actual data resides.
You can do something
more though.
You can also have annotations
of groups or files.
You can use those, for
instance, to document
the units in which the
quantities are represented
or the provenance of
the data or whatever.
It's up to you.
It's completely
under your control.
The nice thing about
HDF5 is the fact
that it's platform independent.
You can generate an
HDF5 file on Windows
and read it without any
issues on Linux or macOS.
It's also available for many
programming languages, Fortran,
obviously, or we wouldn't
be talking about it in this
particular course, but also
in C, C++, in Java, R, Python,
and MATLAB--
your typical software
stack for analysing data.
So it is actually programming
language agnostic.
It's designed to be efficient.
So under the hood, it
is a binary data format,
so that guarantees performance.
But due to the
structure and metadata,
due to the annotations, it, in
fact, is sort of human readable
but also machine readable.
So you can do
introspection on HDF5 files
to determine the type
of certain data sets
or to get the
dimensions and so on.
And if you have a
parallel file system,
it is also suited to
parallel I/O on HDF5 files,
so that's really an asset.
So let's have a
look at data sets.
Data sets essentially are
multidimensional arrays.
They can be one-dimensional, can
be two-dimensional, and so on.
A data set always has a name.
So that's convenient
because you can refer
to it by that particular name.
That is part of
the documentation
of an HDF5 file, which is,
in a sense, self-documenting.
It also has a data
type, and HDF5
supports many data types, such
as integers, floating point
numbers, single precision,
double precision, character
data, and datetime but
also things like opaque,
for instance so that
you can use a data set
to store a sequence of
images in, for instance,
JPEG format or TIFF.
And there are many more types.
Check the documentation
for more information.
The third thing that
characterises this data set
is the data space.
That defines the
number of dimensions
and the maximum size
in each dimension,
as well as the current
size in each dimension.
So it might be that you
define the maximum size
but don't fill the data
set as yet completely.
All of that is stored
in the data space
that belongs to a data set.
So each data set is
characterised by a name,
data type, and data space.
A very nice feature of data
sets is that you can slice them.
The terminology in HDF5
for that is hyperslabs.
And you can use that to
select parts of your data.
For instance, you can
slice a particular part
of this three-dimensional
structure
so basically, in this case,
just a two-dimensional array
out of that
three-dimensional array.
Or you can also
slice it differently
and have a
three-dimensional array
out of your
three-dimensional array.
You can do with hyperslabs
whatever you want.
Obviously, all
hyper-slabs are not equal.
So depending on the data
layout in the file itself,
some hyperslabs will have better
performance than the others,
but that's it.
Too sophisticated
to go into now.
A special type of
data set is a table.
And that's, in fact, a
one-dimensional array
of records.
A record consists
of multiple fields.
And again, a field
has a name and a type.
So you can view this as a
sort of Excel spreadsheet.
It can be very convenient.
There is, of course, a
lot more to say about HDF5
and PRACE has courses available.